[AUDIO LOGO]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
We have an amazing
program for you today.
Pioneering death educator
Gail Rubin with us,
certified thanatologist.
And the "Doyenne of
Death" shall explain
what that means
in a moment where
she uses humor and
outside the box
activities to teach all
of us about planning ahead
for the end of life.
Gail, welcome to
"Beyond Belief."
>>GAIL RUBIN: Great to
be with you, George.
>>NOORY: How did
you get involved
in this subject matter?
>>RUBIN: I got married in
2000 was the second wedding
and had a very creative
Jewish-Western wedding.
And we had folks
dress in Western wear.
And everybody had
such a great time.
I wanted to write a book about
creative life cycle events
and call it matchings,
hatchings, and dispatchings
about weddings and births and--
>>NOORY: Interesting title.
>>RUBIN: --deaths.
And I got to write a feature
in our local newspaper,
a monthly column.
And the stories about
death and funerals
got the most reader response.
And there are plenty of
books about creative wedding
planning.
But 15 years ago,
there wasn't much about
creative funeral planning.
And with my background
in event planning,
I focused on funerals as the
party no one wants to plan.
>>NOORY: Amazing.
You're called the
"Doyenne of Death."
And doyenne is French.
But what does that mean?
>>RUBIN: It means a
woman who's considered
senior in a group who knows a
lot about a particular subject,
so.
>>NOORY: Not necessarily
the dying subject
but just about anything, right?
>>RUBIN: Right it could be
in any area of expertise.
>>NOORY: Who coined
that phrase for you?
>>RUBIN: My brother
came up with it.
>>NOORY: How did he
come up with that?
>>RUBIN: He just
threw that out there.
And I was like, I love that.
It sounds great.
I ran out and trademarked the
phrase "Doyenne of Death."
And then I find out most people
don't know what a doyenne is.
>>NOORY: No, not at all.
Well, they do now
after listening and--
>>RUBIN: And they do now.
>>NOORY: --watching this show.
>>RUBIN: And
thanatology as well.
That's a term a lot of people--
>>NOORY: Well yeah
what is that subject?
>>RUBIN: --don't know.
>>NOORY: What does that mean?
>>RUBIN: So thanatology
is the study of death,
dying, and bereavement.
The term comes from the
Greek demigod Thanatos,
who was the personification
of a good death.
His twin brother is
Hypnos, which is sleep.
>>NOORY: Uh-huh.
>>RUBIN: So sleep and a good
death are very closely related.
>>NOORY: Is the dying subject
taboo to a lot of people?
>>RUBIN: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: Why?
>>RUBIN: They're afraid of it.
The mystery of death, if you
don't know what happens to you
after you die, if
you're low self-esteem--
self-esteem has a lot to do with
being able to talk about death.
There are studies that say
that 2/3 of the population
has low self-esteem.
And it kind of tracks with only
about 33% of people in America
do wills and trusts,
advanced medical directors--
>>NOORY: They're
not ready, are they?
>>RUBIN: --preneed funeral
planning-- they're not.
>>NOORY: Are they in denial?
Is that why?
Or they just don't like
the subject matter?
>>RUBIN: They don't
like the subject.
Some people are in denial.
My father-in-law
says, I'm not going.
And he's 94, so.
>>NOORY: Good for him.
He's in no rush.
>>RUBIN: He's in no rush.
>>NOORY: He's in no rush.
My mother's going to be 94.
Same thing, drives herself.
She took a fall a few weeks ago.
But she's OK.
>>RUBIN: Oh, good.
>>NOORY: But she said--
the doctor told her,
that's what kills old people.
You fall.
But she's not afraid of dying.
She's very spiritual.
It's very, very religious.
And she understands that
there's a hereafter.
Do you get involved in that too?
>>RUBIN: I talk
about it if somebody
is comfortable with the
idea of a hereafter.
Really, the phrase is everyone
wants to go to heaven.
But no one wants to
die to get there.
And so that's what I
bring humor to the topic
of discussing death to help
break down that resistance.
I have a license to use
film clips in my talks.
And film clips are
very memorable.
I can make a point about--
>>NOORY: What are the clips of?
>>RUBIN: Oh, I use scenes from
comedies and from some serious
films that can make
points about why--
>>NOORY: About
the dying process?
>>RUBIN: Well, no,
about planning ahead.
>>NOORY: Oh, OK.
All right, and there
are some professionals
who do that for people,
right, death planners?
>>RUBIN: Death doulas are--
it's a new field that
is really starting
to become more popular.
It's mostly women, I notice,
who are becoming death doulas.
They want to work
with a dying person
or and their family to
help them prepare better.
My goal is to speak to people
before anybody's sick or dying
and get people to
plan ahead because--
>>NOORY: That makes more sense.
>>RUBIN: --just
30% planning ahead
is going to leave 70% of
the population scrambling
to pull together information and
make expensive decisions when
they're grieving.
And that's not the time to be
levelheaded about these things.
>>NOORY: Gail, what
is the Death Cafe?
>>RUBIN: The Death Cafe is a
worldwide movement that started
in 2011 in the United Kingdom.
A gentleman named Jon
Underwood was inspired
by the work of a Swiss
sociologist named
Bernard Crettaz, who would
hold these gatherings in cafes.
You have a little coffee or
tea, some cake or cookies,
and just talk about whatever
is on your mind about mortality
issues.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>RUBIN: I found out
about that and brought it
to the United States in 2012.
I was one of the first people
to hold the Death Cafe here.
And now, it's in 82
countries around the world.
And there have been more
than 15,000 Death Cafes.
>>NOORY: Do they pick
certain spots to go to?
>>RUBIN: Well, you can have
it in a physical location.
Since the pandemic,
I've been holding them
online as Zoom meetings.
And yes, you can
hold it in a cafe.
You can hold it in a
church or a funeral home
or a library, wherever
people want to gather
and have those refreshments.
The idea is to let
the participants lead
the discussion.
But it helps to have
somebody who can facilitate,
keeping the discussion going.
>>NOORY: Interesting
take on that.
>>RUBIN: And it ranges
from financial concerns,
spiritual ideas,
physical, fear of
physical medical intervention
in the dying process, things
like that.
But I've heard some
incredible stories
during Death Cafes about
near-death experiences
and the idea of somebody
who has clinically died.
And during that time that
they were physically dead,
they still experience something.
One gentleman told
me about a experience
where he was like
walking in a garden.
And there was a wall next
to where he was walking.
And he could hear people
talking and drinking--
>>NOORY: About him?
>>RUBIN: No, well, just
having a good time.
And they were like,
come on, come on over.
But he knew if he went and
drank beer with these folks,
that he wasn't
going to come back--
>>NOORY: Oh, it was the dead.
>>RUBIN: --to his physical body.
Yeah, but he did come back.
And people who have near-death
experiences very often,
their fear of death
disappears because--
>>NOORY: That's interesting.
>>RUBIN: --most often
they're experiencing
something that feels beautiful
and loving and light-filled.
And this guy was like,
I know when I die,
I'm going to go
drink beer with God.
>>NOORY: When I was getting
ready for this program
with you, Gail, I was
counting the number
of people that have
been close to me that
have died since I can remember.
And that's at least
a dozen people
that have been relatively
close to me and then
two immediate family members.
My father died.
He was 88, 11 years ago.
My sister died of a brain tumor.
She was 56.
>>RUBIN: Oh.
>>NOORY: I still have another
sister who's doing quite well.
And my mother is still alive.
But I've lost a lot of people
who have been close to me.
And sometimes it's not easy
because you hear a song
that you remember about that
person or something like that.
Do you deal with the
grief end of this too?
>>RUBIN: I can help
people talk about it.
And grief is something
that is not linear.
It's not something to get over.
When we love people
in this lifetime
and they physically
leave our presence,
we still have a
relationship with them.
And sometimes the grief of
their loss will overwhelm us.
Grief is like an ocean
and comes in waves--
>>NOORY: It's tough.
>>RUBIN: --at
unpredictable times.
Yeah, things like
scents and music
can set off our
memories and our grief.
>>NOORY: What is it,
Gail, about death
that scares so many people?
>>RUBIN: The uncertainty
of when it will happen,
how it will happen.
We're afraid of loss.
We're afraid of pain.
So it's a lot of
fear that contributes
to being afraid of
death that it's unknown.
We shouldn't be afraid.
Talking about it isn't
going to make it happen.
Planning ahead is a loving thing
that you can do for the people
that you love.
>>NOORY: I would like to
go when I go in my sleep.
I don't want to be
in a hospital room.
I don't want to have
pain and suffering.
I don't want to be an invalid.
I just want to go to sleep
one night and not wake up.
>>RUBIN: That would be the
ideal for a lot of people.
>>NOORY: Now, will
you know you're dead?
Will you really
know you're dead?
I get a question from people.
Then they say, is
the afterlife real?
And I said, I believe it is.
But if it isn't, you won't know.
So don't worry about it.
That's my answer to people.
>>RUBIN: Yeah,
yeah, well, I don't
know if you would know
if you were dead or not.
My take on it is that we
are spiritual beings having
a physical experience.
In the Jewish tradition,
you're not fully alive
until you're breathing.
And it's the breath of
life that your spirit
is inhabiting your body.
And when you exhale
your last breath,
that's when your spirit
leaves your body.
>>NOORY: I keep
thinking of the actor
Ray Liotta who passed
away in his sleep.
And you just hear these
stories time and time
again where they're fine
when they go to bed.
What happens to them?
>>RUBIN: Heart attacks
can happen in your sleep.
>>NOORY: That's true.
Do they even feel anything?
Or is it like an instant death?
>>RUBIN: Well, it
depends on how you die.
There's a psychic named
Tammy Holmes that I've
done a number of sessions--
>>NOORY: I've heard of her.
>>RUBIN: --at her
Before I Die Festival.
You know about Tammy?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>RUBIN: She told me
that when you die,
you leave one of your--
through your chakras.
And if you have a
heart attack, you
would exit through
your heart chakra.
If you had a stroke
in your brain,
you would exit out through
the top of your head.
>>NOORY: You were mentioning
near-death experiences.
Do a lot of people have these?
>>RUBIN: I don't know how
many people actually--
>>NOORY: Danion Brinkley
had it three times.
>>RUBIN: Wow, yeah.
I think there are a lot
of people who are probably
having them if they do
become clinically dead
and then are revived again.
And what I've read about
is that mostly, they're
positive experiences.
But I think maybe
10 or 15% of people
have really scary experiences
in their death experience.
>>NOORY: That seems
like a high number.
>>RUBIN: Well, maybe
it's tied to how
they're living their lives.
>>NOORY: You know
author William Peters?
>>RUBIN: Yes.
>>NOORY: He wrote a book
called "At Heaven's Door."
And he talks about the death
space and the shared death
experience.
>>WILLIAM PETERS: The
shared death experience
is very similar in phenomena
to the near-death experience.
But it's different in
terms of the experiencer.
The experiencer is a caregiver,
a loved one, and in some cases,
a bystander who
expresses that they
shared in the journey of a
person dying into a benevolent
afterlife.
So the notion is you've
got somebody dying.
And you have people typically
relationally significant
close to the dying.
And they, in a
certain sense, hitch
a ride with the dying into
a benevolent afterlife.
The main themes we see in
the shared death experience
are the sense of journey.
It's really clear
from our research
that the experiencers
say, I witnessed
or I observed or
I strongly sensed
that my departing loved one was
moving into another dimension
that was good.
In terms of the
dominant features
you see in a shared death
experience, just over half
of our research
respondents say that they
saw the dying in the afterlife.
They witnessed or
sensed the dying moving
along this journey.
And then the other two--
I think these are
significant-- is that about 16%
report that seeing an elevated
being sometimes referred
to as an angel, some
sort of guiding force,
but a higher-consciousness
being, non-human
and, once again, assisting
in a certain way.
And then the final one
would be deceased relatives.
About 13% report seeing
deceased relatives.
But the most of
the other features
you see in the
near-death experience
are also present to different
degrees in a shared death
experience.
The light is present.
You can have a life review.
There are other features
like heavenly realm,
sublime feelings.
Highly, highly
energetic experience.
>>NOORY: Gail, does the shared
death experience happen a lot
with people who are close to
or associated with the dying
person, for example,
somebody in a hospital?
>>RUBIN: I've heard about
a person who was a hospice
volunteer sitting with
a patient who was--
>>NOORY: Who was dying.
>>RUBIN: --dying.
And they both-- in their
shared death experience,
the spirit of the dying
person and the spirit
of the hospice
volunteer sitting there
rose up out of their bodies.
And they both had very
wide eyes looking at each--
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>RUBIN: --other.
>>NOORY: Like, what
are we doing here?
>>RUBIN: Yeah, yeah, and
then the dying person
was actually becoming
younger and then went off
on their journey.
And the witness in
the shared death
experience, the
hospice volunteer,
came back into their body.
>>NOORY: What creates that
shared death experience?
What initiates it?
>>RUBIN: I think there's maybe
an opportunity in meditation
to become more aware of
the energies around us.
But sometimes it just
catches people unawares.
Maybe somebody is actually
sleeping in their bed,
and a loved one or somebody
they know is dying elsewhere.
You can have a shared death
experience that way that--
>>NOORY: Is it scary?
I'm not sure I'd want to share a
death experience with somebody.
>>RUBIN: Well, I mean,
it seems like it's
like a near-death experience.
But you're not actually dying.
But you're accompanying
someone who's--
>>NOORY: You're not,
but they might be.
>>RUBIN: Right,
right, but I think
maybe this happens
to people who are
a little more spiritually open
to the energies of the universe
to experience it.
I would love to experience it.
I've had my aunt die recently.
A good friend of
mine died recently.
And I was like, will I have
a shared death experience
with them?
But it didn't happen.
>>NOORY: It didn't happen.
>>RUBIN: No.
>>NOORY: You have to--
>>RUBIN: I don't think--
I don't think you
can make it happen.
>>NOORY: You touched
on this earlier,
but what is a death doula?
>>RUBIN: So death
doulas are primarily
women who are trained to
help a dying person prepare
for their death.
>>NOORY: They're like
midwives to the dying?
>>RUBIN: Right, exactly.
A birth doula-- a doula was
originally for helping women
give birth.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>RUBIN: And dying is
exactly the opposite
of coming into this world,
it's going out of this world.
Over the past
century and a half,
this society has
gotten very good
at pushing death away and
tucking it into funeral homes
and into hospitals.
And this is a way to
help people to plan ahead
for it, not just practically,
but also spiritually.
And hospices are very good
at helping people with that.
But unfortunately,
a lot of people,
they don't want to go
on hospice because that
means I'm going to die.
Well, we're all
going to die, anyway.
>>NOORY: It's going to happen.
>>RUBIN: We do have a 100%--
>>RUBIN: --mortality rate.
But hospice provides
so much support
to the family to
help support them
as well as the
person who's dying.
>>NOORY: Would you like to
experience a shared death
experience?
>>RUBIN: I'd like that.
I'd be fascinated,
it would definitely
add to my "Doyenne of
Death" credentials.
>>NOORY: What brings you back
from the dead in the shared
death experience?
>>RUBIN: Well, it seems like
you're just accompanying
the person part of the way.
And then when they get to--
>>NOORY: But who sends you
back, though, or stops the trip?
>>RUBIN: I don't know.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>RUBIN: It's a mystery.
>>NOORY: What is the Before
I Die Festival concept?
>>RUBIN: There has been a rise
in death discussion movements
ever since I started doing
this, really, in 2010.
The Before I Die Festival,
it could be a day.
It could be a week.
It could be a
month of activities
that get people to talk about
our 100% mortality rate.
And it's--
>>NOORY: It opens up
people, I guess, right?
>>RUBIN: It opens up people.
It can be theater, movies,
speakers, field trips,
behind-the-scenes tours at
funeral homes and cemeteries.
One of the things I've found
being the "Doyenne of Death"
is that funeral
directors actually have
a really great sense of humor.
But--
>>NOORY: I bet.
>>RUBIN: But when they have
to deal with a family that's
already had a death
in the family,
they have to be
somber and solicitous
and not cracking jokes, unless
the family is cracking jokes.
So what I want to
do with the Before
I Die Festival is to get
people to a funeral home
to meet these people while
they can crack jokes.
When death seems like
a distant possibility,
that's when we can
laugh about it.
And then we can
learn what we need
to do to help our loved
ones before we die.
>>NOORY: I'm not sure I'd want a
funeral director to crack jokes
about my deceased
family members.
>>RUBIN: Well,
that's exactly right.
They don't do that when you've
got a dead person that you
have to make arrangements for.
>>NOORY: Let's hope they don't.
>>RUBIN: No, no,
that's why their--
the concept is usually
of somebody somber.
And people tend
to avoid them too.
Because then, oh, funeral
directors, that means death.
And we want to avoid death.
So my approach is
to, let's laugh
and let's learn well
before anybody's dead.
>>NOORY: Gail, what is
a upon my death letter?
>>RUBIN: My friend Gary had
written an upon my death letter
because--
>>NOORY: Is it like a will?
>>RUBIN: No, it's more like--
well, Gary was a bachelor.
He didn't have any kids,
didn't own a house.
He wrote out this
letter to his sister,
giving her the
details of what would
need to be done when he died.
>>NOORY: Upon his death.
>>RUBIN: Upon his death.
He wrote down all the accounts,
his bank account, utilities,
his retirement pension.
>>NOORY: Where things are.
>>RUBIN: Where things are,
where to find his preplanned
cremation papers that he had--
>>NOORY: Look in the
mattress for all my cash.
>>RUBIN: Look in this
particular drawer,
yes, for all of the papers.
And that was so helpful when
Gary died that he knew--
>>NOORY: That makes
a lot of sense.
That makes--
>>RUBIN: And--
>>NOORY: --a lot of sense.
>>RUBIN: But people's
lives are probably
more complicated than
my friend Gary's was.
But that's what you can help
provide a guiding letter
for your loved ones.
>>NOORY: There is something
called the wall or window
theory?
What is that?
>>RUBIN: Is death a
wall that when you die,
boom, you run into the wall.
You're dead.
You're done.
>>NOORY: That's it.
>>RUBIN: Or is death a
window that opens and--
>>NOORY: Other things.
>>RUBIN: To other things, yes.
>>NOORY: What do you think?
>>RUBIN: I think it's a window.
I think--
>>NOORY: We've been
taught that, haven't we?
>>RUBIN: But there
are people who,
like my friend Gary who believed
when you're dead, you're done.
And yet--
>>NOORY: Some
people believe that.
>>RUBIN: And that's fine.
But then they die.
And maybe they find
out they were wrong.
>>NOORY: Is that sad not to
believe in the afterlife?
>>RUBIN: I don't think it's sad.
I think it's what
people believe.
>>NOORY: One theory
I heard years ago,
Gail, was that religions
created the afterlife
to give people hope and
to give them something
to live by a better life.
If you know you're going
to go to heaven or hell
based on the way you
live in your life,
you're going to
adjust that mostly.
And they think that's
what religions created.
And that it really
doesn't exist.
How would you answer that?
>>RUBIN: Yes, I can see
that religions would want
to influence people's
behavior with the promise of--
>>NOORY: Everlasting.
>>RUBIN: --everlasting life.
But guess what?
I think we have
everlasting life.
We're not just these bags
of meat walking around.
They house our spirits.
And our spirits are eternal.
And I think we live multiple
lifetimes as our spirits
coming back and
learning more things.
So reincarnation.
I mentioned my friend Gary.
He was one of those people
who believed death is a wall.
You're dead.
You're done.
And yet, I had a
dream like two days
after he died, that he
came and visited me.
He looked great.
He was in his golden light.
He was wearing a suit, which he
didn't wear suits very often.
And he was just smiling at me.
He didn't say anything.
And it was a very vivid dream.
>>NOORY: He didn't say,
you're right, Gail?
>>RUBIN: He didn't.
>>NOORY: You're right.
But he did smile.
So I think that was just him
showing up to say, alright,
you were right.
>>NOORY: You're right.
He was wrong.
>>RUBIN: Yeah, but, in
fact, during one of my
Before I Die Festivals where
we were doing Zoom meetings,
I was talking with
psychic Tammy Holmes.
And he actually
came through her.
He had a message for me.
>>NOORY: Did she know about him?
>>RUBIN: Well, I told
her that he had died just
before this festival.
And she picked up
on him right away.
He said he loves you.
And I said, well, it wasn't
very great of him to die right
before this festival.
And he through her, said, well,
what else were you going to do?
You're having this--
>>NOORY: Go figure.
>>RUBIN: --festival, talk
about death, talk about me.
It's OK.
>>NOORY: Did the
ancients have a better
handle on death and dying?
>>RUBIN: Depends what area
of the world you visit.
I mean, the Celtic
people believed
in Samhain, the veil between the
worlds thinning right at what
became known as Halloween.
Central America and
Mexico, they have
Day of the Dead, which
is also at the same time
where the dead come to visit.
And this is why we would have
pictures of our loved ones
in our homes for Day of the
Dead because the idea being,
if you watched
"Coco," that you had
to have your picture on the
ofrenda, the altar with all
of your family and friends
that you're honoring in order
to cross over from
the land of the dead
to visit the land of the living.
And I love that idea of--
in fact, what I do in my home is
on the anniversary of someone's
death, will put their
picture on the kitchen table
and light a 24-hour candle
to kind of welcome them
in and visit us for that time.
>>NOORY: Should we plan out
our own funerals before we die?
>>RUBIN: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: We should.
Really?
>>RUBIN: We should, yes.
I planned mine.
>>NOORY: Huh.
>>RUBIN: My husband and
I, we actually went.
And you can put
your arrangements
on file with the funeral
home and not prepay for it.
>>NOORY: What if you
live another 20 years?
>>RUBIN: You still
have your information
that would go on a death
certificate already on file.
Maybe you want to change
your arrangements.
There's so many new
developments in dispositions
that we could talk about that
it's not just burial or flame
cremation.
There are a number
of other options--
water-based cremation,
natural organic reduction,
body composting.
>>NOORY: Do you have to be
religious to plan a funeral?
>>RUBIN: No.
>>NOORY: At all?
>>RUBIN: Nope.
In fact, I'm also a
certified funeral celebrant,
which are people--
>>NOORY: What the heck is that?
>>RUBIN: Those
are people who are
trained to make a
memorial service that's
all about the person who died
irrespective of religion.
>>NOORY: Are you a
professional wailer?
>>RUBIN: No.
No.
>>NOORY: No.
You go to funerals and cry.
You'd throw yourself
on the casket.
>>RUBIN: I have done my 30
funerals and 30 days project.
But--
>>NOORY: That's a lot.
>>RUBIN: --we'll talk
about that later.
No, but a certified
funeral celebrant
can help craft a
memorial service that
reflects the life
of the deceased,
their passions,
how they influenced
the people who love them, and
their impact on the world.
And that's one of
the reasons we need
to have funerals or
memorial services.
It's because we as
individuals have influence
beyond our knowing.
We're active in so
many different circles
that it takes a funeral to
bring all those people together
and honor the impact that
you've had in the world
and on other individuals.
>>NOORY: Aren't we
going to eventually
run out of physical space
to put all the dead?
>>RUBIN: Well, that's something
about the Green Burial Movement
that is actually
helping to address that.
There are green
burial grounds where
the bodies could be buried.
But there's still natural
woodlands or fields.
In addition, the natural organic
reduction process actually
produces fertilizer that could
be put on wild lands, woodlands
to help improve the soil.
But the cremation rate
is shot up incredibly
in the United States.
>>NOORY: It's high.
It really is.
>>RUBIN: Anywhere
from 68 to, depending
on where you are in
the United States,
could be as high as 90% of the
population choosing cremation.
>>NOORY: Has the technology
for cremations gotten better?
>>RUBIN: Yes, the retort, the
machine that actually cremate
bodies, they've gotten a--
>>NOORY: That they wheel the--
>>RUBIN: --lot more--
>>NOORY: --body into, right?
>>RUBIN: Yeah, you just
put the body in the oven.
And they get toasted
down to the bones.
>>NOORY: Flames
are up that high.
>>RUBIN: Well, the
flames are actually--
they point down onto the body
and incinerates the flesh.
And their filtration
systems have improved.
But still, it uses a lot
of energy, natural gas.
Your average cremation,
fire-based cremation
generates 532 pounds of CO2.
>>NOORY: Wow, and how long
does it last, the cremation?
>>RUBIN: Well, flame cremation
could take 2 to 4 hours,
depending on the
size of the body.
>>NOORY: That's intense.
>>RUBIN: Yeah, people who
with a lot of body fat,
it takes longer.
And they have to be very
careful with the temperature.
I've actually seen--
>>NOORY: Blown up a body, right?
>>RUBIN: Well, no,
I've seen-- well,
you have to remove
pacemakers because those
will explode in the retort.
>>NOORY: Oh, god.
>>RUBIN: The battery.
>>NOORY: And you
could hear that?
Boom!
>>RUBIN: There was a movie.
I used a scene from a movie
where they actually did that.
They blew up the
retort by putting
lots of pacemakers in one body.
But I digress.
But the technology for
flame-based cremation
has come a long way.
But now, there's
water-based cremation
called alkaline hydrolysis.
>>NOORY: How does that work?
>>RUBIN: The body
is put into a tank.
And then some potassium
hydroxide and alkaline chemical
is added to the water.
And the water
temperature is raised.
And this speeds up the
process of the decomposition
of the flesh down to the bones.
>>NOORY: Does it
fall apart, the body?
>>RUBIN: It's reduced to the
basic building blocks of life--
peptides, amino acids, fats.
And it's sterile.
And it's great fertilizer.
So some places will
take that liquid
and just put it down the drain.
But it's actually good for sewer
systems because it's slightly--
>>NOORY: Cleans it up.
>>RUBIN: --alkaline.
And sewer systems are more acid.
So it helps-- it actually helps
the sewer system run better.
Or other places will let
families take the liquid
and spread it in their garden.
And it's great fertilizer.
>>NOORY: Will technology,
Gail, change the future
of health care and death care?
>>RUBIN: Oh, it's changing
all the time, yeah.
And I'm hoping that with these
new options in death care
that people's curiosity
would be able to enable
them to ask the questions
before it's needed.
>>NOORY: Gail, you spoke
to author Todd Harra,
author of "Last
Rites: The Evolution
of the American Funeral."
And he predicted a new trend
in celebrating the loved
ones who have passed on.
>>TODD HARRA: I definitely think
there will be a time probably
before I retire that, Gail,
you'll be sitting on your couch
with a set of VR goggles.
And I'll be sitting on my
couch with a set of VR goggles.
And we'll go to maybe
some beach somewhere
and pay our respects
to Mrs. Smith
for the loss of her
husband without ever
having to get up off our couch.
>>RUBIN: Wow.
>>HARRA: And I
definitely think that is
going to be a piece
of funeral service
in the not-so-distant future.
>>NOORY: Interesting take.
>>RUBIN: Yes, well, I've
also seen at funeral industry
conventions holograms of
the deceased prerecorded
before they die.
>>NOORY: That's fascinating.
That's high technology.
>>RUBIN: That's
high tech, for sure.
I don't know how fast
and how far the VR goggle
idea is going to travel.
But things are
changing very quickly.
>>NOORY: What is a VR funeral?
>>RUBIN: That would be a
virtual reality funeral.
>>NOORY: Like what
you're talking about.
>>RUBIN: Right, right,
to put those goggles on
and go someplace else
and have a funeral,
come together in that regard.
But I've never put on
a pair of VR goggles.
So I don't know
how it feels yet.
>>NOORY: I don't like
going to funerals.
I don't go to a lot of them.
But are there a lot of people
there that are emotional?
Do they cry a lot?
>>RUBIN: It depends on
the person who's died.
Somebody who's much
beloved deserves our tears
because we love them.
And I think one reason
people avoid funerals
is they don't want to cry.
They don't want to feel bad.
But part of being
human and loving people
is mourning their passing.
And it's physically not good for
our bodies to repress emotions.
And emotions are
meant to be expressed.
And a funeral or
a memorial service
helps us to release our
grief and shed a few tears
and realize that
we love this person
and we want to
honor their memory.
And pretending that they didn't
die by not having a funeral
does no good--
>>NOORY: No, you can't do that.
>>RUBIN: --to the people
who, yeah, we leave behind.
>>NOORY: Yeah, well, Pete
hasn't called me in a few years.
>>RUBIN: Where is he?
>>NOORY: Where'd he go?
>>RUBIN: But also for, say,
a woman's husband died.
But he says, don't
have a funeral for me.
So thinking she's
honoring his wishes,
she doesn't have a funeral.
But then the community doesn't
recognize that he's died
and might run into her
in the grocery store.
Where's George?
Oh, he died.
>>NOORY: Haven't seen
him in two years.
Where is he?
>>RUBIN: Yeah, right.
Oh, I'm so sorry.
So it's like ripping off the
Band-Aid over and over again
when just by having a
gathering where we can say,
yes, this person died,
we will miss them,
we'll try and support
your loved ones
is a very important--
it's a life cycle event.
And people are trying to
pretend it doesn't happen.
But it does.
>>NOORY: I can understand
a closed casket.
Can't you?
>>RUBIN: Sure.
In the Jewish
tradition, you're not
supposed to put the
body on display.
It's considered disrespectful.
But then there are
other people who
are visual learners who need
to see a body to recognize
that somebody is dead.
My brother-in-law is like that.
He's an artist.
>>NOORY: He needs that proof.
>>RUBIN: When--
>>NOORY: He doesn't believe it?
>>RUBIN: --my
father-in-law died, he
wanted to see his father's body.
And he did.
>>NOORY: Before he'd believe it?
>>RUBIN: Well, of course.
I mean, we saw-- my
father-in-law actually died.
We were in the hospital
with him when he passed.
And it was quite a remarkable--
>>NOORY: But he wanted to make--
>>RUBIN: --experience.
>>NOORY: --sure he was in there.
>>RUBIN: Well, yeah.
And funeral directors
will tell you
that, that there
are people who need
to see the dead body to actually
believe the person is dead.
>>NOORY: Let's go back to
cremation we talked about.
Let's go back to
Todd Harra again who
echoes a lot of things
you've just said.
>>HARRA: When I started
writing the book back in 2018,
nobody had heard of human
composting, which is called
NOR, Natural Organic Reduction.
And now, it's legal
in four states.
And there's legislation in
a bunch of other states.
And alkaline hydrolysis
is legal in 22 states.
And for your listeners who
aren't in the profession,
alkaline hydrolysis is
sometimes called water cremation
or aquamation.
And it's essentially
reducing the body
to something that looks
like flame-cremated remains
but using water and an alkaline
substance and some heat
and pressure.
But what you get back are--
the layperson would
not be able to tell
the difference between that
and flame-cremated remains.
>>NOORY: Why do this, this
kind of technique instead
of just the flame cremation?
>>RUBIN: Well, it uses
a tenth of the energy.
It's so much lower
carbon footprint.
Some people don't like the idea
of being burned alive, even
though they're dead.
It's a warm bath.
That's kind of an appealing
way to be disposed of.
>>NOORY: The Catholic Church
does not believe in cremation.
>>RUBIN: Actually, they said
it was OK back with Vatican
too in 1963.
>>NOORY: Yeah, but
doesn't the Bible
talk about reuniting
with the body?
>>RUBIN: So the Vatican has
said, you can be cremated,
but you shouldn't
scatter the ashes.
You need to inter them in a
hallowed resting ground, which
would be a Catholic cemetery.
>>NOORY: They should come back.
They've got to be all
in one piece, right?
>>RUBIN: Well,
there's the prophecy
of the dried bones where
there's a valley full of bones.
And God just does God's magic.
And the flesh is
back on the bones.
And the bodies
are reconstituted.
>>NOORY: What was
the movie that they
had where the dead was in an
urn on the fireplace mantle
and a cat jumped up there
and knocked it over?
>>RUBIN: Oh, I've
actually used that scene
as a lesson in why
it's important to have
a final resting place
for cremated remains
and not just sitting around your
house even in a place of honor.
But I do have my friend
Gary's ashes in my living room
right now.
>>NOORY: Who hires you?
What kind of person
would hire you?
>>RUBIN: Well, I am available
as an informed consultant
to go with people to make
their preneed arrangements
and save money.
But I also--
I'm a speaker.
And people hire me
to go and speak.
And I get sponsorships
to put together the
Before I Die Festivals that
can help bring people in
to learn what they need
to know before there's
a death in the family.
So that's some of the
ways I make a living.
>>NOORY: This event is brought
to you by both funeral homes.
Something like that, really?
>>RUBIN: Exactly, exactly.
Yes, yes.
>>NOORY: Is it big business?
>>RUBIN: Oh.
>>NOORY: Funeral homes?
>>RUBIN: The funeral business
is a billion-dollar business.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>RUBIN: Funerals
and cemeteries, yep.
>>NOORY: I know some
people who are--
>>RUBIN: They're
dying to get in.
>>NOORY: --putting money
aside for their funeral.
Is that smart?
>>RUBIN: Absolutely.
And that's another reason
people can buy insurance.
I also sell insurance--
final expense insurance--
because this is an expense that
everybody is going to face.
So if you don't have
savings, getting insurance
that you can pay for
on a monthly basis
can make it affordable because--
>>NOORY: When that time comes.
How much does a
funeral generally--
>>RUBIN: Cost?
>>NOORY: --cost?
>>RUBIN: It's kind of
like what does a car cost.
It depends how many
features you want.
>>NOORY: An average funeral.
>>RUBIN: Well, I'll tell you--
>>NOORY: Without
a lot of options.
>>RUBIN: --my husband
and I went to preplan.
And the funeral
part of it is we are
spending $9,000 on
wicker basket, caskets,
and funeral services.
And--
>>NOORY: That's not outrageous.
>>RUBIN: Plus, the burial plot
is about a couple thousand
dollars.
Plus--
>>NOORY: The tombstone.
>>RUBIN: --opening and closing
the grave and the memorial
marker.
You're probably looking at
about $15,000 to $20,000.
>>NOORY: I had a
friend of mine, Gail,
who had an aunt who had
a quarter million dollars
in her will for him.
And she was in her 90s.
And I kept joking to him,
she's going to outlive you.
And she did.
>>RUBIN: Oh, man.
>>NOORY: He died.
She died about three
months after he died.
He would have gotten it all.
His sister got it.
>>RUBIN: Oh, man.
>>NOORY: It's all
about timing, isn't it?
>>RUBIN: Absolutely.
But talking about it too, my
motto is talking about sex
won't make you pregnant.
Talking about funerals
won't make you dead.
I've been talking about
it for 15 years now.
And so far, so good.
>>NOORY: And you're
getting younger.
>>RUBIN: I really encourage
people to talk about these
things, what they might want
should they be in a serious
medical condition
and not be able--
>>NOORY: Sure,
when that happens.
>>RUBIN: And you need to
have paperwork to have
somebody speak on your behalf.
So make your advanced
medical directives.
If you've got
property, make a will.
Because if you
don't have a will,
the state has one for you.
And your stuff
might go to people--
>>NOORY: And they'll take over.
>>RUBIN: --you don't want,
>>NOORY: That's a good point.
>>RUBIN: --necessarily to get.
>>NOORY: Gail, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>RUBIN: Thank
you for having me.
>>NOORY: We're in no rush
to go to the other side.
But when that day happens--
and it's going to
happen to all of us--
you need to be prepared.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[AUDIO LOGO]